We've just been going through with some readings in the House.
But I welcome you to this hearing as well.
So we'll formally reopen the meeting itself.
Thank you for the submission that you've provided.
We've had an opportunity to have a brief read of that.
We've got 10 minutes allocated for your time.
We're going to be quite strict because the bells will be ringing towards the end
there. I want everybody to have the opportunity to get through theirs as well.
So you use your 10 minutes as you see fit.
If you can leave some time at the end there for some questions, if we have them.
So kia ora mai.
Ka pai.
Tēnā koe e te chair mana. Tēnā koutou e nga mima o
tēnei komiti. Ko Paul Emmanuel Harmon tōku ingoa.
To my left here is Paul Harmon, our legal counsel, and at the end there is Uncle
Charles Lambert. I appear today not only as a descendant of
Whānau Hapū uri o Te Rohe o Te Wairoa, but also as co-chairperson of Te
Wairoa Te Pokoroī Mai Tawhiti Trust, Cluster One.
The kāhui trust that represents Whānau Hapū, iwi and uri who
signed alongside other kāhui within tātou tātou o Te Wairoa settlement.
On their behalf, we say to you, we cannot let this bill pass in its current
form, as we contest the transfer of six stock reserves
listed in Schedule 2 of this bill. Mangaone, Panekirikiri,
Tutaemaro, Waihi South, Waikariiti, Ruakituri Reserve,
located in what is referred to as the four southern blocks, and to the
ownership of Te Uruwera Board.
We want to be clear that we acknowledge and support Ngāti Ruapani and
all Māori treaty claims and cultural redress to date and in
future.
Our first point is this. By this bill, Parliament and through Crown,
is breaching the tikanga of our sacred tato pounamu reached
between Ngati Kahungunu ki Te Wairoa and Tuhoe in the early 19th century.
A tato pounamu is not a metaphor, it is not folklore, it is a
binding peace accord. Sealed in greenstone and in whakapapa,
symbolic marriages between our people, and the symbolic marriage of our maunga.
That ended generations of conflict and fixed agreed boundaries
between our iwi. The Waitangi Tribunal records
this tato pounamu into Te Ururu Report Volume 2, at pages
653, 656 to 659,
pages 664 to 665, and
693. The supporting record is annexed to our written submission as
Appendix A.
When the Crown and Parliament legislates over land that lies on the Kahungunu side
of that accord, without our consent, the Crown is not merely making a political
mistake, the Crown is breaking the tato pounamu on our behalf, and that
is not the Crown's to break. Our second point is the practical one.
Where exactly is the tato pounamu boundary?
Our tipuna fixed on the ground, Te Pootu, Kuha, the marae on the
left-hand side of Tuai and Tuteropinga are the two anchor points.
Mangapapa, roughly halfway between them, is acknowledged as the tribal
boundary under tato pounamu. That matters here because the six
reserves that this bill proposes to transfer into Te Ururu
Board lay on the Kahungunu side of Mangapapa.
They are not on the Tuhoe side, they are not on the Ruapani side, they are on
ours. So the bill, in plain effect, takes land that sits on the
Kahungunu side of a peace boundary fixed 200 years ago
and hands governance of it to a Tuhoe-led board.
This is the breach. This is what we are asking the committee to also see.
Our third point is that Mr Christopher Finlayson KC, who is
now Deputy Chair of Te Ururu Board, and who was the minister who architected
the Tuhoe settlement legislation, said on oath in High Court
recording, "I have always considered it was necessary to
have a principled historical basis on which to provide
redress to a group." We accept that test, we hold the Crown to it,
and we say to this committee, there is no principled historical
basis for this deal. Appendix A to our written submission sets
out the historical record in full, including Chapter 7 of Te Ururu
Volume 2, the four southern blocks at pages 689,
690, the Map 7.2 at page
756, and the events around the Te Hap Te Pe
Deed of 1867 and the subsequent Lock
Deed of 1872. Both attempts where I feel the Crown
in their haste to alienate our whenua has made mistakes that have
left lasting grievances for all iwi and hapū involved.
Taken in its totality, Appendix A supports a
single conclusion. No principled historical basis exists
for transferring these reserves out from under Kahungunu mana o te
whenua and into the Te Ururu Board.
The tribunal itself, at pages 689 and
619 of Volume 2, found that Kahungunu, Ruapani and Tuhoe
all have overlapping customary rights and interests in Te Ururu.
Within our own collective knowledge, oral and written, our tipuna
are generally acknowledged as having the dominant mana o te whenua in the southern
half of those blocks. Tuhoe and Ruapani, mana o te whenua
in the northern half. This bill ignores that distinction.
It treats the whole area as if it were Tuhoe Ruapani
country. It is not. Our fourth and final point to you,
the MPs directly,
legal counsel has advised us that over the past 20 to 30 years, a convention
has grown. Judges call it the principle of committee, under which enabling
legislation does not fundamentally alter a signed deed of settlement,
and select committee should not seek alterations to a deed at this stage.
We understand the practice has been bipartisan.
We submit with respect that the practice has to stop with this bill.
Rubber-stamping deeds is an abdication of your role as lawmakers.
It is all the more so here because the Ruapani submission to this very
committee, along with its entity, Te Whare Taupoki submission to the bill,
affirms Ngati Ruapani Mai Waikarimana as a hapū of
Tuhoe. If Ruapani Mai Waikarimana are a hapū of
Tuhoe, this committee has to answer a hard question.
Is the Tuhoe Claims Settlement Act 2014,
declared full and final in 2014, no longer full and
final? And if it is no longer full and final, is it
lawful for Parliament nowTo break the 2014 settlement
law by legislating again over the same iwi.
We do note that Ruapani Mai Waikaremoana is not
listed as a hapū in the TSA 2014
section 13 part one of schedule one, so
perhaps the committee would like to ask what hapū are they listed
as. Those are not rhetorical questions.
Those are questions the committee, as lawmakers, must answer
before reporting this bill back.
To conclude, we submit the following.
Firstly, if Ruapani deed of settlement is legislated as it stands,
we view the Crown's conduct as dishonorable, that we will no longer regard our own
Tatau Tatau o Te Wairoa full and final settlement as binding upon our whānau
hapū kāhui. Second, the Crown and Parliament, by
passing this bill as it stands, will have acted so dishonorably
that as a matter of tikanga, it will have broken the Tatau Pounamu peace accord
reached between Kāngungunu and Tūhoe in the early 1800s.
The Crown does not have the authority to do that.
Parliament does not have the authority to do that.
We respectfully recommend this to the committee.
A, pause this bill. B, test the
so-called principled historical basis for the six reserves with reference
to Te Urureta report volume two, chapter seven.
C, report back to the House that the bill in its current form cannot proceed
without free, prior, and informed consent.
Or remove the transfer of the six stock reserves and
two Te Urureta board from this bill, thus not breaching our Tatau
Pounamu, allowing Ngāti Ruapani Mai Waikaremoana
to reach settlement and continuing negotiations, wānanga hui
between the peoples of Tūhoe, Kāngungunu, Ruapani over their
overlapping interests in these six reserves.
The latter being our preferred option.
Legal counsel has advised the committee has asked for a solution.
We propose-
This morning
... this morning. We propose an iwi tripartite group, two
Ruapani, two Tūhoe seats, two Kāngungunu seats
with a five to six majority vote built into the constitution, therefore
allowing us not to kick the can down the road and get to the business and
organize ourselves and our own governance over our own whenua.
Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Kia ora.
Go ahead.
And thank you very much for the solution that you provided at the end because that
was the-
Mm
... obvious question, because we've heard loud and clear as a committee from a
number of submitters, and I'm expecting to hear some more from some after
you about the actual problem. We've got to try and find a solution.
And you're right with the fact that the select committee historically has made
nominal amendments but nothing of majority amendment.
But that doesn't mean that we as a committee can't have
conversations with people at be to be able to get an
enduring settlement going forward type.
So you're right in what you're saying itself.
We're actually out of time because we're on a very tight time schedule, but
I'm pretty sure that-
Oh, right
... Tatau Tatau and others will be similarly able to back you up.
But thank you very much for your submissions.
Thank you.
Tena koutou.
There's been a slight rearrangement.
I understand that this has been agreed by the submitters, so we're moving on to
the Erepeti Marae committee, please.
It's this one right here,
is it? Oh. Tena koutou.
Tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
So you've probably heard my beginning before.
We've got 10
minutes here on the front?
Yep.
Yep, 10 minutes allocated for your time with us.
Ka pai.
We've heard the opportunity to read what you've provided us, right?
So use that time as you see fit.
Ka pai. Thank you very much.
Keep my comments brief.
Tena koutou katoa. E te komiti.
Ko Matukuhia, ko Whakapunake, ko Maungapohatu Ō mātau
maunga e tū mai nei.
Ko Ruakituri, ko Waioroa, ko Pupu, ko Nengenenge, ko Tangirau
ngā awa e rere kau ana ki te moana-nui-a-Kiwa.
Ko Tākitimu te waka. Ko Te Aitanga a Paurangahua,
ko Ngāti Hinganga ngā hapū.
Ko Erepeti te marae. He uri ahau nō Ngāti Kahungunu ki Te
Wairoa nō Tūhoe hoki. Ko Tina Mehare tōku
ingoa. Kia ora, Tina. Ka noho ahau
i mua i a koutou he mānga mō tōku whānau,
ō mātau hapū anō hoki.
Ehara i te mea
mā mātau anake te hunga ora tēnei kōrero, ā,
mā ō mātau tūpuna, mā ō mātau reanga
kāore anō kia p**a mai.
Mm.
Mā tātau katoa tēnei kōrero.
Erepeti Marae is affiliated to Ngāti Kahungunu ki Te Wairoa,
Tūhoe, Ngāti Rongo Mauwahine, Ngāti
Ruapani, and Iwi of Tūranginui a Kiwa.
We are known collectively as Ngā Tokorima o Hinemanuhiri.
We are of our hapū, Ngāti Hinganga, Te Aitanga a
Paurangahua, Te Pae Rauta, and Ngāti Kōtere.
We have made this submission on behalf of trustees and whānau beneficiaries of
Erepeti Marae.
Erepeti Marae is represented by our post-settlement governance entity,
Tatau Tatau o Te Wairoa Trust. We sit within the kāhui
beneficial entity of Te Hononga o Ngā Awa
Trust.
We are beneficiaries of the settlement agreement between the Crown and the iwi and
hapū of Te Rohe o Te Wairoa that was signed in 2016.
At this point, we wish to make it clear that we fully
support a settlement for our Ngāti Ruapani whānau
and all of the subsequent benefits it will bring to current and future
generations of Ngāti Ruapani.
We wish our whanaunga every success for a positive
outcomeTātou Tātou o Te
Wairoa has raised concerns about a specific part of the settlement
regarding the decision to transfer certain lands to Te Urewera
Board.
Erepeti Marae shares the concern of Tātou
Tātou o Te Wairoa.
I quote from the summary deed of settlement between
Ngāti Ruapani mai Waikaremoana and the Crown,
"A key aspiration for Ngāti Ruapani
mai Waikaremoana is to see Crown owned land in their area of
interest returned into Te Urewera where it will be
protected for future generations of Ngāti Ruapani."
The Minister for Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations has said that from a legal
perspective, the proclamation of one group's interest should not
undermine or diminish the interests of another, and that groups have shared
interests and particular places are encouraged to work together to
find ways to honor one another's interests, and to
manage the lands in
accordance with each other's wishes.
During the course of the settlement negotiations, Tātou Tātou o Te Wairoa
and Ngāti Ruapani mai Waikaremoana have been negotiating
a co-management agreement of the following whenua and wāhi tapu where there
are shared interests.
Waikareiti Conservation Area,
Ruakituri Scenic Reserve, Pane Kirikiri Conservation
Area, Tūtaemaru Conservation Area, Maungaone
Conservation Area, Waihi South Conservation Area.
In the November 2016 deed of settlement between
Ngāti Kahungunu ki Te Wairoa and the Crown, there were statutory
acknowledgments and deeds of recognition that legally recognized our
interests in and in connection with specific whenua and wāhi
tapu. A number of sites on the list fall
within the areas I just mentioned.
Those sites are the Pane Kirikiri Conservation Area,
Ruakituri rivers and its tributaries, Wairoa
River and its tributaries, Waiau River and its
tributaries,
Waikaretaheke River and its tributaries,
Hungaroa River and its tributaries.
Tātou Tātou o Te Wairoa and Ngāti Ruapani Waikaremoana,
to our knowledge, have not yet come to an agreement regarding a suitable
co-management arrangement, and this gives rise to three potential
issues. Number one,
the transfer of these lands to another entity, particularly Te Urewera, may
change the non-exclusive arrangement to an exclusive one.
Our concern is that the interest of hapū and whānau who are represented
by other entities, such as Tātou Tātou o Te Wairoa, may
not be recognized by Te Urewera, and we may be shut out of
decision-making and lose our rights to manage and protect our
whenua.
Number two, the concern for existing partnerships between the
Department of Conservation and Tātou Tātou o Te Wairoa.
Similar to the first issue, we cannot be sure that Te Urewera
can or will recognize these existing partnerships.
Number three, if the lands pass into the management of Te Urewera, there is
uncertainty around not only access for us, the hapū and
whānau with shared interests, but for all New Zealanders.
Therefore, there are three recommendations that Tātou Tātou o Te Wairoa makes as
part of this submission, which we support.
Those recommendations are, number one, that the Select Committee amend the
bill to remove provisions transferring the five conservation areas and
one scenic reserve to Te Urewera, or pause the progression of the
bill until a satisfactory arrangement to protect overlapping
interests has been made.
Number two, that the Select Committee amend the bill to explicitly
protect existing partnerships of iwi, hapū,
whānau and iwi authorities with the Department of
Conservation.
Number three,
that the bill includes provisions that ensure iwi and hapū of Te Rohe O
Wairoa are guaranteed practical and meaningful
representation in any governance or management arrangements affecting
these lands.
To conclude this submission, we would like to make this committee aware that our
people are no strangers to dealings of this kind.
For more than 150 years, the Crown has given themselves all the power to
decide whose interests matter most and what happens to those who are
perceived to be a threat to its power.
It is so obviously an exercise to divide and conquer Ngāti Kahungunu,
Ngāti Ruapani and Tūhoe, of which we are all whānau.
Since the Ha Te Pe deed was signed in 1867, the block
deed after it in 1872, which led to the loss of the four southern blocks,
we have been classified friendlies and rebels.
We have had our land taken, reclassified, reallocated,
cut up, tiny pieces returned with unmanageable
conditions, and the rest stolen from us, leaving us
economically, socially, and culturally destitute
and divided.
We have tried to fight for our land to be returned, doing so at huge risk of
losing further land and accruing crippling debt.
Like Tūhoe Ngāti Ruapani tried to do in 1875 when they asked the
Native Land Court to intervene when Crown grants were given to Ngāti
Kahungunu as a result of the block deed.
They did it to try and protect their interests, which would be inherited by their
future generations.
This is exactly what we are doing today.
Let me be clear, this submission is not in opposition to Ngāti Ruapani,
nor is it in opposition to Tūhoe. Rather, it is in
opposition to the law that is removing our rights to our
whenua.The Crown has consistently maintained over the
years, including during the evidence to the Waitangi Tribunal during their
Turuwera inquiry, that no prejudice arose from their
dealings and no breaches of Te Tiriti o Waitangi occurred.
Yet, by 1872, we found ourselves landless and pitted
against one another for our rights and our interests to be
recognized. We find ourselves here today in
2026 trying to stop the same thing happening
yet again.
We are tired of having these conversations, and the Crown must be so tired of
listening to all of these voices and dissent of opposition, of
spending years, decades, millions of dollars
negotiating agreements that are impossible for us to agree to.
Give us back our rangatiratanga. Honour Te Tiriti o Waitangi
so our future generations never have to fight like we and our
ancestors had to.
Ka reira atu te mihi kia o ngā whare o ngā
whānau o te marae o Erepeeti ki te komiti nei.
We thank the committee for their consideration of our submissions.
Tena koutou katoa.
Kia ora. Thank you very much. Another good submission, and you've
made it very clear what you believe is the solution as well, and that's important
for us to understand that. Unfortunately, we don't have enough time
for any questions.
That's fine.
But thank you very much for your submission. Kia ora.
Ka pai. Nga mihi nui ki a koe.
So next up is Ngati
Pahauwera Development Trust.
They're online? Okay.
Tena koe.
Tena koe. Tena ratou katoa. Nga iwi, nga hapu
i waenganui
i era whare o Parramatta.
My name is Toru Waaka. I'm the
chairperson of Ngati Pahauwera.
Our submission is made on behalf of our iwi,
the Ngati Pahauwera Development Trust, in relation to the above bill, inasmuch
as it affects Waikaremoana, associated lands
and reserves, and related government governance arrangements.
We support the settlement of
historical treaty claims and acknowledge the aspirations of Ngati
Ruapani by Waikaremoana
to achieve redress. Our submission is not opposed to
settlement. One of the reasons
we don't oppose it is that
Ruapani is very much a part of us,
as are many other
relationships.
Ruapani himself died on my land at Moaka,
defending our collective interests.
And also the
patu pounamu that was referred to in one of
the Wairoa submissions. That was a patu
pounamu
passed over by one of our rangatira, Tureia, who was a
tipuna of Ngati Pahauwera. As I say, we are very much
connected to Ngati Ruapani, and we do want to see them
achieve a success in terms of their settlement.
Our concerns are narrow and
principled.
One of the reasons I say that is we,
in the past, have had agreements regarding the
Crown. One I specifically refer to
is the Mangaha Rurutangi to Trust
settlement, whereby much of our lands were
given away as part of that
settlement. We lost lots of our interests.
So a reference to the fact that we do not want a
settlement that creates new grievances for the people of Te Wairoa
is a very pertinent one.
Ngati Kahungunu, in supporting the settlement,
we do not want to create foreseeable treaty grievances,
but we want to secure durable
settlement outcomes.
Ngati Pahauwera, along with the other hapu of Ngati Kahungunu,
we recognize Lake Waikaremoana was a
traditional food source shared by many iwi
including Ngati Pahauwera and many of our members,
and also shareholders in the Waikaremoana lands.
One of our members, Huriana Lawrence, he put in
one of the earliest
tribunal claims to the Waikaremoana Trust
lands, and I am disappointed with the fact that he has been
left out of this process. His tipuna was
a owner of much of the lands in that area.
The Ngati Pahauwera traditional area of interest follows the Wairoa up
to towards Lake Waikaremoana.
We
did utilize it as part of our food gathering areas like many
others. Ngati Pahauwera also acknowledges the Kahungunu
whakapapa through Hinemanuhiri and her descendants.
Ae, toko rima o Hinemanuhiri, Tamatarangi,
Makoro, Hingarangi,
Pupuni and Pareora. Pareora
is one of our tipuna
associated with our Putiri marae, which has also strong
relationships with the Waikaremoana
area.Ngāti
Kahungunu exercise customary authority across Lake
Waikaremoana and Waikareti.
The four southern blocks, the Waiau, Tukurangi,
Taramarama and Rukuturi, and the
Waiau, Waikaretaheke,
Rukuturi, Hangaroa and Wairoa River systems.
These interests are substantial, but not exclusive,
exercised alongside Ngāti Ruapani and Ngāi Tūhoe,
and function as an interconnected landscape governed through whakapapa,
seasonal movement, mahinga kai, wāhi tapu and
negotiated hapū relationships.
As demonstrated in the Crown Commissioner research of
Belgrave and Young, Māori customary rights in Waikaremoana
operated as negotiated spaces,
not fixed or exclusive boundaries.
Attempts to impose a single iwi
narrative
retrospectively distorts the historic reality.
Fighting of the courts.
Multiple forums addressing Waikaremoana have been
in play over the past with the Crown, and they've
been unable to reconcile competing claims
precisely because each claiming group held
legitimate ancestral rights.
In
its consideration of the bed of Lake Waikaremoana, the Native
Land Court expressly found that each of the three contending parties
had ancestral rights, and that proposed
boundary lines asserted by any party could not be corrected
in
their entirety.
Limits to the inquiry. The Waitangi Tribunal acknowledged
that the division of inquiry districts between Te Urewera and Te
Wairoa constrained the ability of Ngāti Kahungunu and
Ngāi Tamanutarangi to fully present evidence
relating to Waikaremoana.
The Crown practice and risk of government monopoly.
The historical record demonstrates a consistent Crown
pattern favoring singular governance arrangements for
administrative convenience.
To me, it's like a paint-by-numbers process just to
get
settlements over the line
to end the settlement process.
It tends to ignore overlapping
customary interests and, like I said,
with the Maungaharuru Tangi Te Trust and the Henare
settlement, our lands were given to compensate
other iwi
interests at our expense.
Non-exclusive redress must operate in practice.
The Crown has repeatedly asserted that redress in this area is
non-exclusive. We accept
non-exclusivity in principle.
However, there needs to be clear performance
measures in the management agreement arrangements
for the claimants to be able to monitor
whether this is actually put into practice.
History demonstrates that such outcomes predictably generate
process, litigation, and long-term grievance,
and yes, so it needs to be done
within the constraints of tikanga as well as the law.
The specific concerns arising under the bill, they
relate to
six Department of Conservation areas as well.
A Maungoni Conservation Area,
Panekirikiri
Conservation Area, the Tutuaemaru
Conservation Area, Hawaiki South Conservation Area, the
Waikareti Conservation Area, and the Rukuturi
Scenic Reserve.
Toro, can we bring your submission to a close soon?
Because we're running out of time. Can you make some closing remarks, please?
Yes. So as I repeat,
our submission does not seek to undermine the Ruapani settlement.
It seeks to ensure that Parliament does not
resolve one grievance by creating another one.
And yeah, as I referred to,
we are a victim of that process, Ngati Pari, already.
The historic record between the committee is clear.
Waikaremoana has never been exclusive.
Durable settlements require legitimate
governance.
And as I said earlier,
it would be good to have
some monitoring and performance measure
arrangements in the co-management agreements of
these
conservation reserves so that
people can have a real input in terms of managing.
Ngati Pari has a co-management agreement with DOC, and it
is definitely lacking in terms of where we get
input.
So
in my final statement, durable settlements
require legitimate governance, inclusive decision-making,
and a respect for established relationships grounded
on whakapapa and tikanga. Tena ra tautoko.
Tena koe, Toro, and you've been very clear with your submission, both in writing
as well as verbally. Unfortunately, we are out of time, but we appreciate
what you've brought before us today. So thank you, Toro. Kia ora.
Kia ora koutou.
Okay, we're going to move to Tatotato
now.There are
13 copies in the sleeve for your pleasure.
Tena koe. Tena koe.
And once again, thank you for the very fulsome submission that you provided with
all the evidence that you've got here. You've done a great job with that.
We've got 10 minutes here, as you've heard before, so please use it as you see fit.
Kia ora.
All going well, there should be one minute in reserve.
Okay.
You fire away, because we are short on time.
Thank you. He te hear mana whanau McLeod, maunga Titohea,
tena koe.
Kai nga mema o te committee whakawa, tena koutou katua.
Kai aku rangatira, kai nga whanaunga, e Ngati Ruapani.
Ka mihi kau ana ki o koutou. He tikanga no tenei what, kia huri
mai taku tura ki o koutou aroaro mai.
Kia ora.
My name is Pirri Munro, and I am the chair of Tatau Tatau o te Wairoa
Post-Settlement Governance Entity.
With me today is a small roopu tautoko who have traveled here especially for this
day in support of our submission.
We appear on behalf of the iwi and hapu o te rohe o te Wairoa, Ngati
Kahungunu ki te Wairoa. At the outset, I want to be clear about
our position. We support treaty settlements.
We support Ngati Ruapani achieving settlement.
But we oppose elements of the bill that transfer or effectively place
six Department of Conservation reserves under arrangements that
marginalize other mana whenua and create a foreseeable
future grievance.
This submission is deliberately narrow. It is not about the whole bill.
It is about six specific reserves and how Parliament avoids repeating past
mistakes.
We are also mindful of the context before this committee.
There have been 81 submissions on this bill.
Independent analysis shows 59 opposing and 22 supporting.
That tells us this bill is contested and not consensus.
In that environment,
we are looking for two things, clarity about what opposition is targeting
and practical amendment pathways that reduce future conflict.
Our submission is designed to do exactly that.
We are not opposing settlement, we are identifying specific flexible risk.
Our position is grounded first and foremost in whakapapa.
The iwi and hapu of te rohe o te Wairoa hold deep intergenerational connections to
Waikaremoana and the surrounding lands, including all six
reserves affected by this bill.
Our whakapapa is inseparable from Ngati Ruapani, but it is also distinct and
enduring.
These connections flow through Kahungunu and Omaiwahine, their son
Kahukuranui, his daughter Hinemanuhiri, and her union with
Pukaru, the son of Ruapani.
From that union came Ngatokirimane Manuhiri, Tamaterangi, Makoro,
Hinganga, Pupuni, and Pareora, the tipuna of many
hapu of te rohe o te Wairoa.
These are not abstract genealogies.
They are lived and continuous. In the Waiau,
Waikaretaheke, Ruakituri, Hangaroa, and Wairoa Rivers, in
mahinga kai sites, in wahi tapu and urupa, and in the
ongoing practices of ahi ka, ahi komau, and
kaitiakitanga. The key point is simple.
These lands have never belonged culturally or historically to one iwi
alone.
The hapu of te rohe o te Wairoa with recognized interests include
Ngai Tamaterangi, Ngati Makoro, Ngati Hinganga, Ngati
Hinemanuhiri, Ngati Mihi, Ngati Matangirau, Ngai Te Kawae
and Ngati Putere, Ngai Kohatu, Ngati Hinehika, Ngati
Hinanga.
These relationships have been maintained through occupation, mahinga kai, cultural
practice, and continued return. Where a permanent occupation was disrupted
was due to Crown actions, not abandonment.
That distinction matters.
Submissions before you are not one single block of opposition.
They fall into distinct streams. Some support the bill as a long
overdue settlement. Some, like us, support settlement but raise
durability risks, particularly where a non-exclusive redress may become
exclusive in practice.
Others raise boundary and mana whenua concerns from different directions.
The implication is very clear. If the drafting is not
precise, Parliament risks embedding conflict from multiple
directions and not resolving it.
Ministers has described this redress as non-exclusive.
We accept that principle, but we say this clearly.
Non-exclusive redress must operate in practice, not just in theory.
If governance arrangements remove us from decision-making, override
existing partnerships, or place control in a body where we have no seat,
then redress becomes exclusive in practice, regardless of what the legislation
says. That is not durable settlement.
Our concern is targeted and practical. It relates to six reserves.
Mangaonea, Panekirikiri, Tutaimaro, Waihi South,
Waikareiti, Ruakituri.
These six reserves are where the risk is most acute, and importantly, this is where
the bill can be amended. This is not a theoretical issue.
It is a precise drafting issue with a clear solution.
Through our settlement and longstanding relationships, Te Rohe o Te Wairoa has
established partnerships with the Department of Conservation Te Papa Atawhai.
These arrangements recognize our interest and were intended to give effect to
non-exclusive relationships. However, we have not been engaged by the
Minister of Conservation. We have not been consulted on the proposed changes
affecting these reserves. This is despite obligations under our deed
of settlement. That failure matters.
Parliament should not endorse changes to conservation land governance that
undermine partnership commitments or proceed without engagement with affected
iwi.
There is also a broader lesson. The proposed arrangements would place these
lands under governance where effective control sits with one iwi, and Te Rohe o
Te Wairoa has no representation. The 2024 report by the
Office of the Auditor-General found that Tutuweta has not been effectively managed
and highlighted ongoing funding and delivery challenges.
That is a warningIt shows what happens when
governance arrangements are not durable, inclusive, and properly
supported. If those risks are repeated here, it will not just affect iwi,
it will affect the public.
If conservation areas are not well-maintained and there is a mishap in terms of
safety, people will stop visiting.
That has implications for public access, tourism, and New Zealand's wider
reputation and economy. It is the minister who has amplified the point
of public access. These risks are real and avoidable.
The Auditor-General has also repeatedly warned that poor settlement implementation,
weak governance legitimacy, and ignored overlap risks lead
directly to litigation, compensation, and loss of confidence
that settlements are indeed full and final.
In a Te Tari Whakamo memo to the minister, dated 22 April
2025, and in part, it states their relevant policy
position. Quote, "Crown overlapping interest
policy guides you on what you should consider when making decisions on contested
redress. The policy includes the principles of, A,
partnership. Māori and the Crown have a duty to act reasonably and in good faith
towards each other. B, active participation.
The Crown seeks to ensure it actively protects the interests of all groups,
including overlapping groups and the settling group, and to actively
preserve and promote amicable relations with and between
groups.
And C, redress.
The Crown needs to understand how its actions might affect the interest of a
claimant group and the interest of overlapping groups.
In doing so, the Crown must be conscious of the need to avoid the creation of fresh
injustice and the need to maintain capacity to provide appropriate
redress in future negotiations."
We say respectfully, Parliament should not legislate unforeseeable
grievance.
Our ask is practical and it's proportionate.
We ask the committee to recommend that the bill be amended to
remove the six identified reserves from arrangements that diminish the rights and
interests of Te Rohe to Wairoa, or
pause those aspects of the bill until overlapping interests are properly resolved,
and ensure non-exclusive redress is made real
through enforceable safeguards, and protect existing
Department of Conservation partnership arrangements,
and require meaningful engagement, including by the Minister of
Conservation, before any reserve governance changes proceed.
Might I add to this, Chair,
in listening to the questions and your seek for solutions.
If you were to expedite this, your question was about time,
then you might expedite that
after having removed these for consultation and engagement within the
respective parties to bring in a commissioner,
an appointed commissioner, to expedite that process.
This submission is not about stopping a settlement.
It is about ensuring that in resolving one grievance, Parliament does not
create the next.
Durable settlements require inclusion, legitimacy, and good
faith implementation. That is what we are asking you to
protect.
Therefore, Chair and members of the select committee, to my chiefs of Ngati
Ruapani,
to all my relatives. Thank you. Thank you. Goodbye.
Let us all meet again.
Thank you.
I will allow, does anybody have one short question?
I think it's very clear what you see the issue is and what you see as
potentially some of the solutions are.
So unless there's no
questions, hey, thank you very much, Piripi. We appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, we're going to ask for Te Pari Taipoki to please now come
forward.
Welcome.
Thank you.
So again,
thank you very much. So this provides you the opportunity
of responding really to what you've been hearing.
And at the end of the day, clearly we have questions in our heads
as the committee and that, but please help us to understand
where you are positioned with us and what you've heard.
It'd be good to help us with our understanding itself. So tena koe, Kara.
Kia ora. Kia ora koutou. I'll keep this short and sweet so that it gives you an
opportunity to ask questions.
Thank you.
I want to leave the committee with five things.
First, what this bill is.
This bill gives legal effect to a deed of settlement that has been
negotiated in good faith over many years.
The historical account is true.
The apology is owed. The redress is hard won,
and we ask Parliament to honor the agreement the Crown has made with us
and to pass the bill without amendment.
Second,
cultural redress.
The transfer of lands into Te Ruawera is not a transfer into
private ownership.
It is recognition of what has always been.
The Ngati Ruapani mai Waikaremoana holds a responsibility of
kaitiaki in this rohe through whakapapa
and as ahika.
Te Ruawera as a legal entity is the
appropriate framework for that authority to be
exercised.
The sites returned to the Okahu kaitaua and other places
are for our whanau to come home to.
Third, and I want to speak plainly to this.
On the concerns raised by Ngati Kahungunu, Ngati
Pahauwera.
We have heard the submissions both here,
in our negotiations, and at home on our marae at
Waikaremoana.
Mm-hmm.
We ask the committee to hold three things in their minds.
One, those who whakapapa to
Waikaremoana will always whakapapa to
Waikaremoana.That is a matter of tikanga, that is
a matter of kawa, not of statute,
and it is not affected by this bill.
Let's not conflate whakapapa with entities.
Two, those PSGEs who have submitted today,
Katokomihatukikou Pou,
have already settled with the Crown.
They've settled with you.
Their settlements are full and final.
They had the opportunity, through their own negotiations, to seek
redress in respect of the lands they have noted, and the
outcomes of that process are what they
are.
And we see and we recognize that those entities have deeds of recognition,
statutory acknowledgments in places which we would
say are within our area.
But most importantly on this point, our
settlement is not the vehicle for revisiting
theirs.
And the third point here, Kahungunu via the
Tatoutatou o te Wairua deed of settlement also have a
pathway available to them through their own settlement
arrangements in respect of that Te Urewera board.
That avenue exists.
It is the proper one for them to exercise their interests.
Fourth, on Tūhoe. Our relationship with Tūhoe is one of
whanaungatanga.
It is whakapapa, not administrative.
Tūhoe have supported the settlement, and the support reflects a shared
understanding of who holds responsibility in this rohe.
Those who have committed the resources, the time, and the effort for
the care and stewardship of our rohe.
That living relationship will continue to guide how
Waikaremoana and Te Urewera are cared for,
regardless of what is written in any act of
Parliament.
Fifth, on the cost of delaying, our kaumatua have waited their whole
lives.
Each year of delay deepens the disconnection from our rohe,
from one another, from the future of our rangatahi
deserve to inherit. No financial figure
compensates for what has been taken, but this bill is
the first step. It lets the rebuilding
begin.
There is no benefit for the Crown, for our people, or for the relationship
across this rohe in prolonging this further.
Our request remains simple,
that the bill is recommended to be passed without amendment.
Acknowledge in your report the significance of the historical record and the
Crown's apologies, and prioritize its passage.
We are ready,
our governance is in place,
and our people are waiting.
Thank
you.
I've got a very simple question.
At the end of the day, what I've heard over the occasion we had up at
Tuai and also today is basically your
whanaungatanga.
You have different entities that you
represent when you come before us and talk to it, and it's all in passion
plays itself.
But I'm always thinking personally, is that my part in a
treaty settlement process here with my fellow committee members,
is it fair and reasonable? And also, is it
something
that as you're committing to, are you happy to live with what it is with
your whanaungatanga, with everything like that?
So my question is about that. You're wanting us to commit and
proceed as is type thing. Clearly, we've got others that
don't believe that's the right way.
There should be a part of it that should be looked at
differently to what it is. At the end of the day, if this passes through the
third reading and goes to royal assent, you have to live with it.
So my question is,
is that what you're happy with? Is that where you feel right to be positioned with
it?
I guess just to reiterate my last point, we are ready, our governance
is in place, and our people are waiting. Yes.
Appreciate that.
Yes.
You've got the structure. That's mechanical stuff largely.
I'm talking about the fact is this sets a
beginning, a rebuild of the future is what settlements are all about,
and it sets in place that for you. And Eugene, I know you've been involved with
this for a long time. I'm not trying to be pointed in my
question. It's just a fair question.
You have to live with what the settlement is, and you
think that's very fair and just. I
want you to be sure about that. So the question is about, are you comfortable with
where we're at, considering what you've heard from the wider community,
just down the road and your whanaungatanga from elsewhere?
That's the question I'm asking.
Yeah, we've heard them say they support the
settlement. It's just the land blocks that we propose don't-
Yeah
... seem to do it.
Mm-hmm.
But we're always ready to sit down and
talk.
That's how we started this latest run in the Ruapani claims,
was by sitting down and talking with Tūhoe.
Right.
Finding a way forward that we can
both
support. As I think I heard
one or two of them say, to
move forward,
we have to sit down and talk.
And I think we're committed to doing
that after we settle.
Yeah.
Okay.
Committee members, any questions?
If I may just say-
Go ahead
... we can hear
the
pain and frustrations and the way that you just shared your
kōrero right now, your submission.
Look, I thank you for that.
It's clear to me that you're all family,
and that's how you're going to go forward with this.
Okay.
So the process from here is that we go into deliberation.
So we get the opportunity to ask more questions of officials and others,
including the minister if we choose to, about proceeding through here.
I say again, I'd hate to think that we're
creating a
problem for you in this room here. You've
all been very polite in your
submissions to one another and that.
I'd like to think relationships are not torn apart as a
result of a treaty settlement. We're just trying to repair the wrongs of the past
type thing. So, we have a job to do, and we thank
you very much for the input of everybody involved in the
submissions here. I see some of the submitters from Tūhoe as well.
And it's been a wonderful occasion for us to learn more about your
place, about your whānau, and about your history, and that.
So
yes, we have the next step to take, and aroha mai, thank you
for the long journeys that many of you have taken, and a safe journey home from
today. Kia ora mai.
Kia ora.